 
 1 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  Address of His Excellency Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, President of the 
Federative Republic of Brazil  
Monday, March 16, 2009 - New York  
 
 
My friends,  
 
The world is today going through its most serious crisis since 1929. It is a very 
different crisis from tho se of past decades.  
 
A crisis that first appeared neither in an emerging country nor in the far reaches 
of the international system. A crisis that was born and later exploded in the 
heart of the developed world. It came about largely through lack of overs ight of 
financial systems in rich countries.  
 
Instead of playing their rightful role in financing production, banks spun out of 
control and gave themselves over to speculation. They transformed themselves 
into one great casino.  
 
Many financial institutions  went bust, a great number of businesses floundered 
and millions of workers lost their homes, their jobs and their social security. 
Very quickly, the greed of a few gave way to mass panic. A profound crisis of 
confidence gripped the economy of the richest countries.  
 
Brazil has not been overrun by such a crisis. Our banks – both private and 
public – were not infected by the recklessness  of international speculators.  We 
have solid government -controlled banks, which today represents 40% of the 
country’s cre dit pool that cushioned the worst impact of the financial meltdown.  
  
 2 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  When the crisis first broke, at the time of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, our 
economy was in good shape.  We were growing at a brisk pace, the highest in 
over 30 years.  
 
Over the last  six years, the Brazilian economy has generated over 11 millions 
new formal jobs together with a significant increase in blue -collar income.  The 
consumer goods market grew considerably as a result of our income distribution 
policies, above all the Family Stipend Program (Bolsa Familia).  
 
Real wage hikes, land reform that benefits family agriculture and the 
unprecedented increase in working class access to low -cost credit have helped 
enlarge the consumer market.  Over twenty million people, previously belo w the 
poverty line, joined the ranks of the middle class.  
 
Contrary to commonly held prejudices and forecasts,  we have demonstrated 
that the domestic market can be broadened while at the same time increasing 
exports. These have risen almost four -fold in t he last six years. Exports are now 
shipped to a wider range of countries. They are no longer geared to any one 
major market.  Exports of added -value goods have increased.  
 
Inflation has been tamed. Our vulnerabilities to overseas turbulence have been 
slash ed.  Brazil has become a net international creditor nation. We have 
accrued over US$ 200 billion in foreign reserves.  
 
Thanks to stringent expenditure controls, the domestic public debt has fallen 
from 58% of GDP, in 2003, to just 35% of GDP today – low b y world standards.  
 
At the outset of my second term in office, the Growth Acceleration Plan was 
launched with a view to developing energy, transport, urban and social  
 3 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  infrastructure. This plan initially called for investments in the order of US$ 250 
billion at the then prevailing exchange rate. In answer to the present crisis, US$ 
30 billion in additional investments has been earmarked to accommodate 
expanded exploration activity by Petrobrás in the large -scale “pre -salt” deposits 
off the Brazilian coast.  
 
These changes have brought a breath of fresh air to Brazil. The economy had 
begun to move into fast gear. More consumption, more production, new 
investments - all benefiting the Brazilian people. In 2008, foreign direct 
investment rose to US$ 45 billion,  2.8% of GDP. In the first two months of this 
year there has been significant capital inflow – going against the global tide.  
 
My friends,  
 
The international turmoil has forced us to face a period of uncertainty not of our 
doing.  Yet, because we had put our house in order and boosted the economy 
beforehand, we are now in a position to ride it out faster.  
 
The Mexico, Russian and Asian crises were less severe than this one, yet at the 
time Brazil was quickly forced to default.  There was no option but to seek help 
from the IMF.  
 
This time round, Brazil has not defaulted, nor will it. We are dealing with the 
present difficulties with all the tools at hand. While the majority of rich countries 
is plunging into recession, Brazil will continue to grow. We wil l grow less than 
expected in 2009, less than we could have were it not for overseas crisis. But 
grow we will.  
 
My friends,   
 4 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br   
Brazilian society has made hard -earned strides over recent years. The 
economic policy decisions made by my Government essentially pu t into practice 
the strongly held convictions of the vast majority of Brazilians. Thirty years of 
stalled or mediocre growth rates simply had to come to an end.  
 
This required dealing simultaneously with the age -old questions of poverty, 
inequality and di senfranchisement of tens of millions of Brazilians. My country’s 
history is clear proof that economic growth of itself will not do away with 
extreme poverty.  
 
By electing me its President, a message was sent that Brazil would be taking a 
new path. Income distribution would be the guiding principle of a new, more 
inclusive and humane form of development, at the same time more sustainable 
and lasting.  
 
Over decades – possibly centuries – our ruling classes governed with the 
interests of no more than a third or a fourth of their countrymen’s interests at 
heart.  It seemed as if tens of millions of men and women, both young and old, 
had no place in the Brazilian Nation. It was as if they were no more than a 
burden or a stumbling block holding back the country’s  progress. As if they were 
not an immense heirloom, and asset of incalculable value.   
 
Brazil has overcome this egoistic mindset, fundamentally small -minded and 
absurd.  It has now become clear that it was and is possible to build a Nation 
with opportunit ies for all citizens.  What is more: Brazil is stronger and has a 
brighter future when room is made for all Brazilians.  
  
 5 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  This crucial path was chosen amid rich and wide -ranging public debate and in 
an atmosphere of renewed commitment to democracy. In our country, over 130 
million citizens vote every two years to elect their representatives and 
government officials. Our institutions, with the National Congress and the 
Judiciary at the fore, have displayed vigor and independence.  Freedom of the 
press is che rished as a cornerstone. Unions, political parties and professional 
associations operate in full freedom.  
 
Ours is a democracy of continental proportions. It boasts a multi -ethnic 
population drawing on rich and varied cultural heritages, but sharing a str ong 
sense of national identity.  
 
Not only are we a people of mixed ancestry, but we like it that way. We live in 
peace at home and with neighboring countries. And this is something we will not 
surrender.  
 
Brazil boasts enormous resources: land, water, su nshine, energy and  
population. Thanks to our achievements in researching tropical agriculture, we 
have become a world -class breadbasket.  
 
Yet we are equally a country with cutting -edge industries in the field of 
biotechnology and aerospace, to mention ju st a few. Renowned universities as 
well as scientific and technological research institutions  are increasingly linked 
up to production centers. We have made great strides in developing renewable 
fuels and in deep -water oil and gas exploration.  
 
Let me here  pause, my dear friends, to refer specifically to renewable energy 
sources. For over 30 years now, Brazil has been developing biofuels 
technology. For 30 years, we have sought to convince the world that global  
 6 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  warming will only be overcome if we take it up on ourselves to develop an 
alternative energy matrix for the world.  
 
For many decades and with extraordinary success, Brazil has added 25% 
ethanol to gasoline. 90% of our cars are flex -fuel, which means that they can 
run on gasoline, ethanol or any mix of the two.  
 
I am perplexed that the developed world insists that we adopt environmentally -
friendly policies meant to reduce global warming, while at the same time 
refusing to sign on to the Kyoto Protocol, refusing to tax highly pollutant fuels 
and imposing  an absurd surtax on ethanol imports.  
 
That is something I cannot comprehend. It may make sense from a purely 
economic point of view, but certainly not if we seek a new energy solution... 
Both here in the USA and in the European Union, Brazil has challeng ed 
businessmen and governments to join hands in building a truly global 
partnership to transform our energy sources.  
 
Maybe I should not be saying any of this. After all we have just struck oil in the 
“pre-salt” layers off the Brazilian coast. On March 1st, if Petrobrás stands by its 
timetable – José Gabrielli, head of Petrobrás, is here next to me – we will 
extract the first barrel of oil from a depth of over 6 thousand meters.  
 
Why then am I going on about biofuels? I do so because it affords not only a 
chance to clean up our energy lifestyle, but it also represents an extraordinary 
opportunity to provide an answer to the challenge of helping poor countries, 
specially in Africa, to develop.  
  
 7 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  Many would fault Brazilian ethanol for the hikes in food prices last June. We 
made it very clear that this was not true, but quite possibly a strategy on the part 
of oil companies to avoid having illiterate African farmers producing energy. 
Everyone knows how to extract oil, everyone knows the cost of an oilrig, the 
cost of hiring engineers and rig equipment, and of doing research. Yet to 
produce biodiesel all one needs is to dig a small hole, plant a sugarcane 
seedling and, soon enough, you will have clean fuel, abundant jobs and an 
answer to global warming.  
 
I someti mes feel frustrated. I tried many times to explain this to President Bush 
and I will most certainly speak repeatedly to President Obama on this issue. But 
without your help I know it will be very difficult to change this country’s attitudes 
toward energy. And neither do we want to get in a tussle with US corn -growers.  
What we do want is to raise more chicken that will then eat US corn so that we 
can, in return, sell sugarcane -based ethanol to countries in Central America and 
in Africa through Brazilian -American business partnerships.  
 
I have told European businessmen that I do not with to interfere with how 
Europe does things. I do not want to meddle with the well -run German, Swedish 
or Swiss farms. What I do desire is a partnership to produce the biofuels that 
they require. This will come not from beetroot, but rather from a source that 
helps create jobs and develop the African continent. A continent that in 20 years 
will have 700 million consumers in need of food, education and jobs. This is our 
responsibi lity: to share with them all that we have learnt.  
 
The USA cannot afford to get into trouble with Hispanics. After all they are more 
than 40 million individuals who have helped and continue to help build this 
enormous nation, the greatest and richest on ea rth.  
  
 8 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  There is only one way to avoid problems: by working together so that the poor 
are less poor and the rich slightly less rich; so that income distribution is fairer 
and helps strengthen peace.  
 
If I were the President of Petrobrás or head of the etha nol industry in Brazil, I 
would post Brazilian flex -fuel cars in our airports. This would ensure that any 
American or European entrepreneur arriving in Brazil would inevitably ride flex -
fuel cars and realize that this fuel not only smells better but is als o less harmful 
to our health.  
 
My friends,  
 
Right from the outset, my Government has sought to mobilize the country to 
deal with fallout from the crisis.  I will not tire you with an exhaustive description 
of the measures already undertaken and further ac tion under consideration.  
 
We are well positioned to use part of our foreign reserves to help finance 
exports. Bank reserve requirements have been reduced as an antidote to the 
credit crunch. To the same end we have encouraged the buying out of a 
number o f private or local public banks by financial institutions under Federal 
Government control.  
 
We have set up a stimulus package for the auto industry that will help shore up 
this sector. And we will offer financing to build one million houses over the next  
two years.  
 
We will not hesitate to make use of all the tools at the State’s disposal to 
cushion the impact of the crisis. The very State – that some would have to be  
 9 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  minimal and hamstrung – and at whose door so many now knock in search of 
relief.  Yeste rday’s demon has become today’s “savior”.  
 
The Brazilian State – under the rule of law - requires that it fulfill its 
responsibilities.  It will not shirk away from its regulatory role. And, whenever 
necessary, it will intervene to avoid market failures fr om generating economic 
and social chaos.  
 
We will not cower vis -à-vis the crisis. I will not cut a single penny from social 
programs nor from infrastructure projects. We will continue to responsibly 
encourage Brazilian consumers. This will ensure a speedy  recovery of 
production levels and, as a result, help preserve jobs and create new ones.  
 
Yet I am fully aware that our national endeavors alone will not suffice. This is a 
global and systemic phenomenon. It can only be fully overcome through equally 
globa l and systemic solutions.  
 
While our exports represent only 14% of GDP, we will continue to strive for 
higher overseas sales in response to the crisis. This is why I have championed 
a speedy conclusion to the Doha Round of the WTO.  
 
Protectionism is a drug  that provides temporary relief, but in the end leads to 
major crises. Twentieth century history is our witness.  It is crucial that 
multilateral organizations help unblock the flow of credit required to jumpstart 
world trade, especially in developing coun tries.  
 
I am aware of the importance of preserving banks, insurance companies and 
financial institutions. The savings, homes and social security of tens of millions  
 10 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  of men and women depend on them. It is equally important however – surely 
more important – to save jobs.  
 
I know from my own experience what it means to be out of a job. To be 
unemployed is to lose more than just a source of income.  One loses a sense of 
purpose, of personal dignity and hope, especially given the overwhelming 
dimensions of the present crisis.  
 
Each country will deal with this critical moment in its own way, according to its 
specific circumstances.  Yet it is no less clear that a coordinated response is 
required.  
 
Present circumstances point to a failure in the mechanisms of glo bal 
governance, which include economic and financial multilateral organizations, in 
particular the IMF and the World Bank. It is for this very reason that the G -20 
has gained political stature and clout.  
 
It is imperative that the recent reform of the G -20 be lasting. After all, the 
developing countries that it has now taken onboard – while bearing no 
responsibility for the crisis - will no doubt contribute to its overcoming.  Brazil will 
submit concrete proposals to the London Summit.  
 
Many of them aim t o make the IMF more democratic. Others have to do with 
increasing the Fund’s ability to help restart inter -bank flows and commercial 
credit.  It is imperative that the Fund apply the same oversight over developed 
economies as it has exercised over poor and  developing countries. It might also 
refrain from the show of arrogance that it often displayed in the past.  
  
 11 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  Our proposals, which I brought up with President Obama the day before 
yesterday, are being discussed with other friendly countries. They will incl ude 
recommendations for abolishing tax havens. These havens are major allies of 
all forms of international organized crime, ranging from drug trafficking to 
corruption and terrorism. Effectively fighting these scourges requires combating 
the financial supp ort that they have always enjoyed.   
 
My friends,  
 
Mine is not a rash optimism. I know the Brazilian people.  
 
We will overcome this crisis earlier than many others. We wish to do so together 
with our South American neighbors and the whole of Latin Americ a. Yet even if 
we are successful, in the medium term, in redressing the most perverse aspects 
of the present turmoil, there will still be long -lasting consequences.  
 
The present crisis is not simply economic or financial. It is a crisis at the heart of 
our civilization. It points to absurd production and consumption patterns that 
destroy nature, and that put in jeopardy not just the future of humanity but even 
its present -day chances of survival. It brings to light the irrationality of economic 
concepts th at were thought to be timeless, but that in fact encouraged reckless 
speculation. It therefore has an ethical and moral dimension.   
 
The present crisis threatens the very core of democracy by revealing that 
humanity’s destiny has escaped human control. To  fully overcome this crisis will 
require setting up new paradigms:  
 
- For organizing production and work regimes;  
- For preserving the environment;   
 12 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  - For fostering a culture of peace that sparks a new and democratic global 
governance;  
- For enshrining politics as  a superior form of action through which men 
and women freely write and refine new social contracts.  
 
As I said, here in New York, during the last UN General Assembly, “ it is time for 
politics ”. This is the message I will be taking to the London G -20 Summi t. 
 
Complex economic challenges are before us. Technicalities will arise that must 
be dealt with. Yet effective solutions will only be possible if we provide political 
answers, political will. In many countries it is not just the economy that is being 
challenged. The risk of social unraveling and political chaos is the greater 
threat.  
 
Therefore the economic decisions that will be required must be governed by 
highly precise and courageous political reasoning. This is what is expected of 
leaders. That is wh at we were elected for. We must honor the mandate 
bestowed on us . 
 
In the dark hours of history, political will must not be confused with the childish 
voluntarism of those that ignore realities. When economic irrationality prevails, 
the democratic State ta kes up, with renewed vigor, the tasks it should never 
have lost.  
 
The tasks of fostering and regulating economic activity, promoting social 
equality, guaranteeing liberty and encouraging solidarity.  We are only 
transiently at the head of our States. Yet o ur responsibilities stretch far beyond 
the present. The future of humankind will hinge on our actions or omissions.  
  
 13 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  My friends,  
 
Last Saturday, I met with President Obama. You no doubt heard my friends 
speak about our relationship with Latin America. The present crisis affords an 
opportunity for people like President Obama and for people like myself, who 
after six years in office, just might be tiring. This crisis has challenged me to 
continue to strive, to seek to achieve more.  
 
Yesterday, in El Salvador , a new president was elected, a great friend, whom I 
have known for years. Latin America and South America have been undergoing 
unprecedented political renewal. The Cold War is over, as is the time for armed 
struggle. This is a time for democracy to be ex ercised in all its fullness, even 
when it at times may appear confused, distorted and abrasive.  
 
The United States of North America has the obligation and the extraordinary 
chance to renew its relationship with Latin America. Not the Alliance for 
Progress  of the sixties, but through a true partnership geared to helping poor 
countries to prosper; by joining in building what remains unfinished.  
 
I know Latin America like the back of my hand. It is a blessing that I am friends 
with almost all its Presidents,  ranging from Michelle Bachelet to Calderón, in 
Mexico. Each in his own way wishes to work in partnership with the USA; all 
have hopes that the USA will foster a new more constructive relationship, rather 
than a policy of political interference and conflic t.  
 
I speak frequently with Evo Morales, with Chávez, I talk with Rafael Correa, with 
Uribe, with Cristina Kirchner and Michelle Bachelet. All, without exception, seek 
to reengage constructively with the United States.  
  
 14 Discurso do Presidente da República  Presidência da República  
Secretaria de Imprensa  
16/03/2009   Visite o site d a Secretaria: http://www.imprensa.planalto.gov.br  I hope God will illuminate Preside nt Obama, since we will all soon be meeting in 
Trinidad and Tobago. It will be his very first meeting with all the Presidents of 
Latin America. Hopefully we will grasp this chance to launch a policy of 
democratic coexistence, one that fosters prosperity fo r all. We will all have 
different approaches and specific proposals according to our national needs, 
but in the understanding that only by standing united will we build peace.  
 
A last word: please excuse me, those of you who are anxious to get to 
lunch.  C uba: I do not know what the Cuban want, because they did not ask me 
to bring up the issue. But the fact is that there is no longer any reason, be it 
political, sociological or rationally human terms, for Cuba and the USA not the 
reestablish relations. It i s unacceptable that in the 21st century we are still driven 
by a 20th century mindset. Let us think politics in 21st century terms, rather than 
being under the spell of what happened in the 20th or 19th centuries. Only thus 
will we learn from our mistakes and improve on our achievements.  
 
Therefore as I leave the USA I take with me the conviction that the election of 
President Obama may possibly be an opportunity for the USA to do things 
differently. To do more and better. After all the best way to fight t errorism and to 
foster peace is to make more friends and less enemies.  
 
Have a good lunch and thank you.  
 
 
 
 
 
($211B)  
 